{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 So, you wrote some code, and you need to make a ticket.  The first thing to do is get it into your sage library. \
\
1.  Consider your mercurial queue as a parfait, you need to add a fresh new layer to it, before you start working.  This way, if you do something crazy, you can "pop" it off, and start fresh.  To do this:\
\
../../sage -hq qnew Wednesday\
\
I always call my new layers by the day of the week, it helps to keep things straight.   Doing a qnew will automatically "push" that patch, so when you say\
\
../../sage -hg qapplied\
\
Then, "Wednesday" should be on top.\
\
2.  Now add all of your new stuff into the sage library.  As you add new things, save your work, and then\
\
../../sage -hg qrefresh\
\
will add it to your mercurial tip.  Now to get sage to recognize it, rebuild your library\
\
../../sage -b\
\
If there are major problems with your code, then this won't work.   So, this is a good place to check your code.  \
\
3.  If you are satisfied, then you can export the patch, and send it to your home directory\
\
../../sage -hg export tip > ~/wednesday.patch\
\
Now it should be in your home directory, make sure it's there.  \
\
4.  Now you need to make a new Trac ticket, and put the patch up there.  You should rename the patch before uploading it.  If you ticket is #13031, then the convention is \
\
Trac_13031.patch \
\
This part is pretty self-explanatory.  }