= GSoC 2020: Ideas Page =

== Introduction ==

Welcome to Sagemath's Ideas Page for GSoC 2020! ([[https://wiki.sagemath.org/GSoC/2019 | Last year 2019]])

'''[[https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/ | SageMath's GSoC organization homepage]]''' -- the hub for submitting applications and where the everything on Google's side is organized.
([[https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/how-it-works/#timeline | Timeline]])

Please subscribe to the [[https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/sage-gsoc|sage-gsoc]] mailing list and the GAP developer list for discussion on possible GAP GSoC projects. Also, make sure you have gone through the '''[[https://wiki.sagemath.org/GSoC/Students | information regarding application procedures, requirements and general advice]]'''. The Application Template is also available on that wiki page. Archives of past GSoC project ideas can be found [[https://wiki.sagemath.org/GSoC | here]].

All projects will start with an introduction phase to learn about Sagemath’s (or sister projects') internal organization and to get used to their established development process. We also '''require''' you to show us that you are able to execute actual development by submitting a relevant patch and/or reviewing a ticket via [[https://trac.sagemath.org/ | Trac]] of the project you are interested in applying to. The [[http://doc.sagemath.org/html/en/developer/index.html|developer guide]] is a great comprehensive resource that can guide you through your first steps in contributing to Sagemath.

Apart from the project ideas listed below, there is also a comprehensive list of future feature wishes [[http://trac.sagemath.org/query?status=needs_info&status=needs_work&status=new&milestone=sage-wishlist&or&milestone=sage-feature&col=id&col=summary&col=status&col=type&col=priority&col=component&order=priority|in our trac issue tracker]].
They might contain the perfect project idea for you we didn't even think about!

<<TableOfContents()>>

= Project Ideas =

Here is a list of project proposals with identified mentors.
Other well-motivated proposals from students involving Sagemath in a substantial way will be gladly considered, as well.


{{{#!wiki comment/dashed
---

TEMPLATE

== Project Title ==

|| Mentor     || Name(s) ||
|| Area       || Mathematical and/or technical scope ... ||
|| Skills     || What the student should bring ... ||

...

  * ...
  * ...
}}}

== Berkovich Projective Line ==
|| Mentor     || Benjamin Hutz||
|| Area       || Schemes/Dynamical Systems ||
|| Skills     || One semester of graduate algebra and analysis, Python, git ||
Implement a basic framework for working with Berkovich space points and functions
 * define a type I,II,III,IV point
 * basic point operations, such as equality
 * evaluate the induced map on Berkovich points from a projective morphism
 * (as time allows) implement some of the dynamical systems algorithms that utilize Berkovich space (minimal model, etc).


== Improve support of representation theory (multiple projects) ==

|| Mentor     || Travis Scrimshaw ||
|| Area       || Algebra, Representation Theory, possibly Combinatorics ||
|| Skills     || Understanding of linear algebra, preferably representation theory and algebra, associated combinatorics desirable, Cython experience is good ||

Representation theory is the study of symmetries and is an important part of modern mathematics with applications to other fields, such as physics and chemistry. GAP supports doing computations using the characters of representations, but it often does not contain constructions nor manipulations of the modules. There is currently some limited support within Sage for representations as a proof-of-concept, but this needs to be expanded and refined. Things that can be added are tensor products (for bialgebras), dual representations (for Hopf algebras), induction and restriction functors, methods to construct representations of groups (e.g., symmetric group), Lie algebra representations, etc.

== Implement Schubert and Grothendieck polynomials ==

|| Mentor     || Travis Scrimshaw ||
|| Area       || Algebra, Combinatorics, Schubert Calculus ||
|| Skills     || Foundations in combinatorics, experience reading research papers ||

Schubert calculus can roughly be stated as the study of the intersections of lines, through which certain algebras arise that can be represented using Schubert polynomials and Grothendieck polynomials. The main goal of this project is to finish the implementation started in [[https://trac.sagemath.org/ticket/6629|#6629]], as well as implement the symmetric Grothendieck polynomials and their duals in symmetric functions.


== Simplicial sets: complete the integration with Kenzo ==

|| Mentor     ||  Miguel Marco ||
|| Area       ||  Algebraic topology  ||
|| Skills     ||  Mathematical background on simplicial sets. Experience with Lisp ||

Kenzo is a Lisp program that is able to compute homology and homotopy groups of a big family of toopological spaces. Sage has an interface to it, but it is not tightly integrated with the existing modules for simplicial sets. This project would consist on iproving the existing interface and integrating it with the simplicial sets module, so we can use kenzo functionalities directly as methods of Sage objects.

It might imply patching Kenzo to support the input provided by Sage.

== Diameter, radius, eccentricities, and distances ==
|| Mentor     || David Coudert ||
|| Area       || Graph theory  ||
|| Skills     || Knowledge of graph algorithms, Python, C/C++, git ||
The graph module of Sagemath already provides some smart algorithms for computing the diameter and eccentricity of unweighted undirected graphs, and a large variety of methods for computing paths and distances.
 * The first goal of this project is to implement best known methods for computing diameter, radius, centers, eccentricities of (weighted) (un)directed graphs, so we could get the complete collection. See for instance [d1] [d2] [d3].
 * The second objective is to clean and improve methods for computing shortest paths and distances (single source and all pairs). In particular, implement the method proposed in https://ask.sagemath.org/question/44823/sage-floyd-algorithm-in-cython/. 

References:
 * [d1] Feodor Dragan, Michel Habib, Laurent Viennot. Revisiting Radius, Diameter, and all Eccentricity Computation in Graphs through Certificates. http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.04660
 * [d2] Takuya Akiba, Yoichi Iwata, Yuki Kawata: An Exact Algorithm for Diameters of Large Real Directed Graphs. SEA 2015: 56-67 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-20086-6_5
 * [d3] Borassi, Michele (2016) Algorithms for metric properties of large real-world networks from theory to practice and back. Advisor: Crescenzi, Prof. Pierluigi. Coadvisor: De Nicola, Prof. Rocco . pp. 262. http://e-theses.imtlucca.it/198/
